Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, my guest is Dr. David Spiegel.
Dr. Spiegel is the Associate Chair
of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
at Stanford University School of Medicine.
He is also the Director of the Stanford Center
on Stress and Health.
Dr. Spiegel is both a researcher
and a clinician, meaning he runs a laboratory
that studies the brain and the body
and neural mechanisms of how the brain and body interact.
And he sees patients as a psychiatrist at Stanford.
His work is incredibly unique
in that it bridges mind and body,
but it also has a particular focus
on the clinical applications of hypnosis.
As you'll learn today, hypnosis is a unique brain state
in which neuroplasticity, the brain's ability to change
in response to experience, may be heightened.
And indeed, the use of clinical hypnosis
by Dr. Spiegel and colleagues has been shown
to improve symptoms of stress, chronic anxiety,
chronic pain, and various other illnesses,
including many psychiatric illnesses
and even outcomes in cancer.
Today, we discuss hypnosis in the context
of what's called self-hypnosis
to distinguish it from stage hypnosis.
Many of you are probably familiar with stage hypnosis,
which is really about a hypnotist getting a person
to do things they would not otherwise do.
In contrast, clinical hypnosis and the use of hypnosis
for the treatment of various ailments of mind and body
is vastly different.
It involves getting people to change their brain state
and to use that brain state as a portal
to make adjustments in their brain and body
and other aspects of their biology and psychology
that benefit them.
And it's been shown over and over again
in studies by Dr. Spiegel and colleagues
that those changes can occur extremely quickly.
Now, not everybody can be hypnotized as readily as the next.
And so today we also discuss a simple test developed
by Dr. Spiegel that can help you determine
whether or not you have a high, medium, or low degree
of what we call hypnotizability.
Dr. Spiegel is truly an expert in this area.
He has published over 480 journal articles,
170 book chapters on hypnosis,
and on things like psychosocial oncology,
which is the interaction of mind and body
in the treatment of cancer and cancer outcomes,
on stress physiology, trauma,
and other aspects of psychotherapy.
He's published 13 books.
So he's truly the world expert in hypnosis
and clinical applications of hypnosis for mind and body.
I'm certain that in listening to today's episode,
you're going to learn a tremendous amount
about how the brain and body interact,
about various treatments for all sorts of common ailments
of mind and body,
and you're going to get access to tools,
in particular, a tool that was developed by Dr. Spiegel,
which is the Reveri app, R-E-V-E-R-I.
The Reveri app is currently only available for Apple,
but will soon also be available for Android.
It does carry a nominal cost,
but there is a seven-day free trial.
If you'd like to try it,
we're providing a link in the show notes.
The Reveri app is special in that it is based
on clinical studies and research done
in the Spiegel lab at Stanford.
So unlike a lot of hypnosis apps out there
and resources for hypnosis,
it was developed with clinical treatments in mind.
Today, we also discussed the use of breath work,
and I'm very fortunate that my research lab at Stanford
has been collaborating very closely with Dr. Spiegel
in testing and developing specific breath work protocols
to adjust mind and body for things like anxiety,
improving mood, and improving sleep.
Based on his incredible and unique expertise
and the clarity with which Dr. Spiegel
communicates information,
I anticipate that you will really enjoy today's episode
and that you'll come away from it
with a lot of actionable tools.
Some of you might be curious what a clinical hypnosis
session looks like.
And for that reason, we had Dr. Spiegel hypnotize me.
A clip of that hypnosis session is going to be posted
to the Huberman Lab Clips channel,
which is available on YouTube.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012,
so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started taking Athletic Greens
and the reason I still take Athletic Greens
once or twice a day is that it covers all of my foundational
vitamin mineral probiotic needs.
There is now ample evidence that probiotics
can be very helpful for supporting
what is called the gut microbiome.
The gut microbiome is an aspect of our biology
in which little gut microbiota live
all along our digestive pathway
and help support various aspects of our biology,
including our immune system, our metabolic system,
our hormones or endocrine system,
as well as what's called the gut-brain axis,
which is literally communication between the gut
and the brain to support things like mood, motivation,
and various other aspects of brain health.
With Athletic Greens, I get the probiotics
that I need to support a healthy gut microbiome
and the vitamins and minerals tap off any deficiencies
I might have based on lack of certain foods
and lack of certain nutrients in my diet.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
to claim a special offer.
They give you five free travel packs
plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2.
There's a lot of evidence now that vitamin D3
is critically important for various aspects
of immediate and long-term health.
And while many people get enough vitamin D3,
many people do not.
So the year supply of vitamin D3 ought to be very useful
for many people.
And K2 has been shown to be important for calcium regulation,
various aspects of metabolic health and so forth.
So again, if you'd like to try Athletic Greens
and get that special offer, the five free travel packs
and year supply of vitamin D3 K2,
go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis.
Thesis makes custom nootropics.
Nootropic is a smart drug.
And personally, I'm not a big fan of the concept
of a smart drug, at least not the way that most people
talk about smart drugs or nootropics,
for the following reason.
Being smart involves various things.
There is creativity, there's focus,
there's task switching and so on.
And each one of those involves different operations
in the brain, different neural circuits,
different neurochemicals have to be deployed
in order for us to, for instance, be very focused
or for us to be very creative
or for us to be able to switch tasks easily.
Thesis understands this.
And for that reason, they've developed custom nootropics
that are aimed at getting your brain and body
into particular states for particular types of work
or physical activity.
In order to accomplish that,
they created unique blends of high quality ingredients.
And each of those blends is designed to get your brain
and body into a particular mode, such as focus,
clarity, or motivation.
I've been using Thesis nootropics for over six months now.
And I have to say, it's been a total game changer
and very unique from the experience of using
sort of what I call catch all nootropics.
So with Thesis, it's really directed
toward particular brain body states.
I should also mention that they tailor
those custom blends to you.
So by taking a quiz on their site,
they will tailor the blend to you and your specific needs
and the things you don't want.
So if you want to try your own
personalized nootropic starter kit,
you can go online to takethesis.com slash Huberman.
You'll take a three minute quiz
and Thesis will send you four different formulas
to try in your first month.
And then based on the outcomes with those,
they can update your formulations for you.
That's takethesis.com slash Huberman
and use the code Huberman at checkout
to get 10% off your first box.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Roka.
Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that I believe are of the utmost quality.
The company was founded by two all American swimmers
from Stanford and everything about the design
of Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses
was created with performance in mind.
There are a number of things about Roka sunglasses
and eyeglasses that I particularly like.
First of all, they're extremely lightweight.
You basically forget that you're wearing them.
Second of all, you can wear them for work,
for going out to dinner, et cetera.
They have great aesthetics, so you can wear them anywhere,
but also for exercise.
You can wear them when running or cycling.
And even if you get sweaty,
they're designed so that they don't slip off your face.
Another terrific feature of Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses
is that they were designed with the biology
of the visual system in mind.
We all have the experience of being in a shaded area
and then going to a bright area.
It takes some time for your eyes to adjust or to adapt.
Many sunglasses make it hard to see
as you move from one environment to the next
and therefore you have to take on and off your sunglasses.
With Roka sunglasses, you don't have to do that.
You don't even notice the transitions
between those bright areas and those dimmer areas.
So you can wear them anywhere, anytime.
And again, most of the time you don't even realize
that they're on your face.
If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses,
go to roka.com, that's R-O-K-A.com
and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off
your first order.
Again, that's Roka, R-O-K-A.com
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
And now for my discussion with Dr. David Spiegel.
David, thank you so much for being here.
Andrew, my pleasure.
Can you tell us what is hypnosis?
Hypnosis is a state of highly focused attention.
It's something like looking through the telephoto lens
of a camera in consciousness.
What you see, you see with great detail,
but devoid of context.
If you've had the experience of getting so caught up
in a good movie that you forget you're watching a movie
and enter the imagined world, you're part of the movie,
not part of the audience,
you're experiencing it, you're not evaluating it.
That's a hypnotic like experience
that many people have in their everyday lives.
So is any experience that really draws us in hypnotic
in that sense?
Or let me give a different example.
If I'm watching a sports game
and I'm really wrapped up in the game,
but I'm also in touch with how it makes me feel in my body,
kind of registering the excitement or the anticipation,
is that a state of hypnosis also?
Because you mentioned there's kind of a narrowing
of context, but a kind of losing of the self.
Or do I have that right?
Yes, it is true that to the extent that your somatic,
your body experience is a part of the sport event
that you're engaged with,
I'd say that is a self-altering hypnotic experience.
If your physical reactions are distracting you
or make you think about something else,
that's when it's less hypnotic like
and more just one of a series of experiences.
Okay.
So I have to ask,
how did you get into this business of hypnosis?
Because I think for most people,
when they hear hypnosis or they think about hypnosis,
they think of stage hypnosis.
I think of somebody with a pendant going back and forth
or people up on a stage,
you're behaving abnormally for the entertainment of others.
How did you get into hypnosis as an interest, as a practice?
And if you would,
could you contrast the sort of hypnosis that you do
in the clinical setting with the sort of hypnosis
that a stage hypnotist does?
Sure.
Well, it is something of a genetic illness in my family.
Both of my parents were psychiatrists and psychoanalysts
and they told me I was free to be any kind of psychiatrist
I wanted to be, so here I am.
My father was training to be a psychoanalyst in 1943
and he ran into a Viennese refugee
who couldn't serve in the army but who had studied hypnosis.
And actually it would interest you
doing your ophthalmological research.
He had a smallpox scar right in the middle of his forehead
and he did forensic examinations
and he noticed that some of the prisoners
would focus on that spot on his forehead
and then close their eyes and seem to go to sleep
but they were in some altered state.
So he got interested in hypnosis.
He used it forensically.
His name was Gustav von Aschaffenburg
and he offered to teach young psychiatrists
how to use hypnosis when they went off into the war.
And so he trained my father
and my father got off the analytic couch
and the analyst mentioned it to him.
That's how he found out about it.
And my father said, did I say something wrong in analysis?
Why is he talking to me now?
And he found it very useful in helping soldiers
who had acute pain when they were wounded
and helping people with conversion
post-traumatic stress disorders.
And when he came back, he went back to his training
but he still was sort of interested in it.
And he had his, one of his supervisors
was Frieda Fromreichmann who was a very famous psychoanalyst
and he said that he had been told to stop doing hypnosis
because it would ruin his reputation as an analyst.
And she said to him, what are you so worried
about your reputation for?
You're gonna give a course at the institute in hypnosis
and I know you're gonna do it because I'm gonna take it.
So he was teaching Frieda Fromreichmann hypnosis
and he just kept doing it and after a while
he discovered that he was getting better results
with a few sessions of hypnosis
than he was with daily psychoanalysis with his patients
and so he switched his practice.
And so the dinner table conversations
were pretty interesting and occasionally
when he was making a movie of a patient,
I would get to watch that.
And so when I went to medical school,
I figured I'll take a course.
There was Tom Hackett who was a chair of psychiatry
at Mass General was teaching it.
It was a very interesting course.
And the day that converted me was I was doing my rotation
at Children's Hospital in Boston
and the nurse is telling me,
Spiegel, your next patient is an asthmatic
in room 437 or something and I'm just following
the sound of the wheezes down the hall.
I go in the room, this is 16-year-old girl,
knuckles white, bolt upright in bed, struggling for breath.
You can hear the wheezing.
She twice had subcutaneous epinephrine, didn't work.
They were thinking about general anesthesia
and starting her on steroids.
And her mother's there crying.
And I said, I don't know what else to do.
So I said, you want to learn a breathing exercise?
And she nods and I got her hypnotized.
And then I realized we hadn't gotten
to asthma in the course yet.
So I made up something very complex.
I said, each breath you take will be a little deeper
and a little easier.
And within five minutes, she's lying back in bed.
Her knuckles aren't white, she's not wheezing.
Her mother stopped crying.
The nurse ran out of the room.
And my intern comes to find me.
And I figure he's going to pat me on the back
and say, nice job, Spiegel.
He said, the nurse has filed a complaint with a nursing
supervisor that you violated a Massachusetts law
by hypnotizing a minor without parental consent.
And I thought, well, that's nice.
I doubt there is a law like this.
So the intern says, you're going to have
to stop doing this with her.
And I said, why?
He said, it's dangerous.
I said, you're going to give her generalized anesthesia
and put her on steroids, and talking to her is dangerous?
He said, well, you'll have to do it.
And I said, I'll tell you what, take me off the case
if you want.
But I'm not going to tell a patient of mine
anything I know is not true.
So there was a battle over the weekend about what to do.
And the intern, the chief resident, attending,
we're all arguing about it.
And on Monday, they came back with a radical idea.
They said, let's ask the patient.
I don't think this has ever been done at Children's Hospital
before.
And she said, oh, I like this.
She'd been hospitalized every month for three months
in status asthmaticus.
She did have one subsequent hospitalization,
but after that, went on to study to be a respiratory therapist.
And I thought that anything that can help a patient that much,
violate a nonexistent Massachusetts law,
frustrate the nursing supervisor,
had to be worth looking into.
So I just kept doing it.
I discovered that all of my classmates in medical school
had just read the new issue of the New England Journal
and had some new medication to suggest.
And surgeons would say, look, if you
can help this guy with his pain or his anxiety, anything
above the neck, that's yours.
Do it, Spiegel.
So I was having fun and being able to learn
how to help people in a way that just otherwise was not
being done.
And so it got me thinking about the fact
that we're born with this brain, but we don't
have a user's manual for it.
And we don't use it nearly as well as we can.
And that's something your research is all about, too.
And so I thought, I want to understand this better,
and I want to see what we can do.
Stage hypnotists drive me nuts.
They make fools out of people.
There was one, this is a case my father was involved.
He got a call from, he was at Columbia.
He got a call, Spiegel, you got to come see this woman.
She's in the ER, and she's in some kind of weird upset state
that happened.
And it turned out she'd been on the show with a stage
hypnotist who, and what they do, by the way,
is they cycle around.
They have, at the beginning of the show,
they don't just grab somebody and say, we're doing this.
They get a bunch of people up.
They do what amounts to hypnotizability testing
to see if people, and they get the ones who
are the most hypnotizable.
So she was the one.
And he said, there's now a little bird in your hand,
and you're going to play with a bird.
And she starts to cry and scream.
And he just gets her off the stage because it's
very upsetting.
And she's wandering around New York City
in the middle of the night, dissociated,
and brought to Columbia.
And that's where my father saw her.
She was still in a kind of uncomfortable,
trance-like state.
And it turned out that she was the trophy
wife of a very wealthy guy.
And she felt like a bird in a gilded cage.
And so to her, that image just triggered
all of this sense of dissatisfaction, discomfort,
fear about her life.
And he was able to get her reoriented and talk
with her about what she was going to do with her life.
But I don't like stage hypnosis.
You're making fools out of people.
And you're using the fact.
And that's what scares people about hypnosis.
They think you're losing control.
You're gaining control.
Self-hypnosis is a way of enhancing your control
over your mind and your body.
It can work very well.
But because it gives you a kind of cognitive flexibility,
you're able to shift sets very easily,
to give up judging and evaluating the way you usually
do, and see something from a different point of view.
That's a great therapeutic opportunity.
But if misused, it could be a danger too.
And that's what scares people about it.
It is that very ability to suspend critical judgment
and just have an experience and see what happens.
That can be a great therapeutic opportunity.
But if somebody is misusing it, it can be a way to harm people.
And there are plenty of examples of people
having fantasies imposed on them that they
come to think are realities.
It's not unusual these days.
So it's an ability that, if people
learn to recognize and understand it,
can be a tremendous therapeutic tool.
I've been staged hypnotized.
And I've been clinically hypnotized many times
through a self-hypnosis app we'll talk about later.
And then I know we have plans for you to hypnotize me today.
You've done it once before.
And I'm very hypnotizable, as we both know.
We'll talk about how one can gauge their hypnotizability.
But the staged hypnosis was interesting.
This was in college.
They brought someone out to the dormitory.
And I recall being one of the people that was selected
and engaging in very bizarre behavior.
It wasn't thoroughly embarrassing,
but it was pretty embarrassing.
And then being sent off the stage,
and as I was exiting, suddenly screaming something out
because he had planted a suggestion of some sort.
And then I was told to look in my pocket.
And there was like, I think, a torn up dollar bill.
There were a bunch of things
that I have vague recollection of.
But it raises a set of questions
that really boil down to, as a biologist,
I always think that there's no events in the brain.
There are processes.
And so hypnosis, we know, has an induction.
Then one is hypnotized, I imagine.
And then it sounds like this woman
and this example of the bird
and being distraught in New York City
is a failure to exit the hypnotic state.
Do we know what sorts of brain areas are active
during the induction, the, let's call it the deep hypnosis,
and then what's shutting off or changing
as people exit hypnosis?
Yes, yes, we do.
We've studied that.
We've been very interested in that.
And so we did a study where we selected
highly and non-hypnotizable people
so we could do the comparison
and then hypnotize them in the functional MRI scanner.
And we found three things
characterize the entry into the hypnotic state.
The first is turning down activity
in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex.
So the DACC is in the central front middle part
of the brain, as you well know.
And it's part of what we call the salience network.
It's a conflict detector.
So if you're engaged in work
and you hear a loud noise
that you think might be a gunshot,
that's your anterior cingulate cortex saying,
hey, wait a minute,
there's a potential danger over there.
You better pay attention to it.
So it compares what you're doing
with what else is going on
and helps you decide what to do.
And as you can imagine,
turning down activity in that region,
make it less likely that you'll be distracted
and pulled out of whatever you're in.
And in another study,
we found that highly hypnotizable people,
even without being hypnotized,
have more functional connectivity
between the DACC, the anterior cingulate cortex,
and the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
which is part of a key region
in the executive control network.
So when you're engaging in tasks,
you're enacting a plan,
you're writing a paper,
you're doing whatever you're doing,
that's the prefrontal cortex is doing that.
And so if that is coordinated,
we found more functional connectivity.
So when one is up, the other's up,
when one is down, the other's down.
That coordination implies that the brain is saying,
okay, go ahead, I know what you're doing,
carry out that plan
and don't worry about other possibilities.
So two other things happen when people are hypnotized.
One is that that DLPFC
has higher functional connectivity with the insula.
Another part of the salience network,
it's a part of the mind-body control system,
sensitive to what's happening in the body,
it's part of the pain network as well.
But it's also a region of the brain
where you can control things in your body
that you wouldn't think you could.
For example, we did a study years ago
where we took people who were highly hypnotizable,
hypnotized them and told them to,
we went on an imaginary culinary tour.
So they would eat their favorite foods.
And we found that they increased
their gastric acid secretion by 87%.
So their stomach was acting as though it was about to get,
I mean, there was one woman, it was so vivid for her
that halfway through she said, let's stop, I'm full.
Eating these imaginary foods.
Having never eaten an actual food.
No. Incredible.
And then we got them to relax
and think of anything but food or drink.
And we got like a 40% decrease in gastric acid secretion.
So they could, and that was DLPFC through the insula
telling the stomach you're getting food
or you're not getting food.
And even, we injected them with pentagastrin,
which triggers gastric acid release.
And even then in the hypnosis condition
they had a 19% reduction in gastric acid.
So the brain has this amazing ability
to control what's going on in the body
in ways that we don't think we have ability to control.
That's just one example.
So that's the DLPFC-insula connection.
The third thing that happens,
and this relates to what you did on the stage,
is you have inverse functional connectivity
between the DLPFC and the posterior cingulate cortex.
The posterior cingulate is part of the default mode network.
It's in the back of the brain.
And it's an area whose activity goes down,
for example, in meditators.
And in meditation you're supposed to be selfless.
You're supposed to, the self is an illusion.
You're supposed to let it dissolve
and just experience things.
And when you're doing that, the posterior cingulate
is decreasing in activity.
The inverse connection is I'm doing something
but I'm not thinking about what it means for me.
I may not even remember much of it.
If I do, I don't care that much about it.
And so that is part of the dissociation
that occurs with hypnosis.
So it's how you put things outside of conscious awareness
and don't worry about what it means.
It also adds to cognitive flexibility.
If you're thinking, well, people like me
don't usually do this, that may inhibit you
from enacting a new form of psychotherapy, for example,
that you've never done before.
But if you're having this decreased activity
in the part of your brain that reflects on what it means,
you're more likely to be cognitively flexible
and willing to give it a try.
And that's one of the therapeutic advantages
of hypnosis as well.
Fascinating.
And it's really, I'm gonna put,
I'm gonna embarrass you here a little bit
in the positive sense.
Your laboratory is really the one that's pioneered
brain imaging of hypnotic states.
And it sounds like that's my understanding.
Is that correct?
Yeah.
I mean, there are other people
who've done excellent research too,
but Pierre Rainville in Montreal and several other people,
but we're one of the leading lamps
in neuroimaging of hypnosis.
I have to ask about attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder.
I get a lot of questions about this
and I think a lot of people just struggle
with holding attention nowadays
because of interference with phones and devices.
And of course there is a lot
of clinically legitimate ADHD out there,
but the way that you describe the dorsal
and the anterior cingulate and the salience network
and this conflict detector of am I focusing on something
or am I splitting my attention?
How distractible am I seems to relate to some extent
to activity in the anterior cingulate cortex.
Do people with ADHD display disruptions
in elements of these networks
and has hypnosis ever been used to,
or self-hypnosis I should be,
to distinguish from stage hypnosis,
clinical and self-hypnosis has been used
to enhance people's ability to focus and hold attention
because that's such a built-in component
of the hypnotic state.
It's a great question.
There's sort of two ways to think about it.
In terms of enhancing focus, yes,
it has been very helpful in teaching people
to just prepare your mind to narrow in
and focus on something.
And when you're really engaged in reading something
or you're writing a, I mean, I'll have that,
sometimes I'm thinking, oh, God,
I have to do this for another hour.
Other times, an hour will go by and I'll think,
hey, great, because when you're in the,
it feels game-like to you.
You're just assembling the parts of the puzzle
and putting them together.
It's fun.
You just get absorbed.
For me, that's a hypnotic-like experience.
When I'm having trouble, when I'm struggling,
sometimes doing things like self-hypnosis can help.
I'm not an expert on ADHD.
My impression is that you're right
that these are people who are constantly distracted
and rather rigid.
The other part of it is they're easily distractible.
They're very upset when they get distracted
and they're rather rigid in what they want to attend to
and what they can't, I think,
as a way of controlling this distractibility, frankly.
My guess is that many people with ADHD
would not be that hypnotizable,
but I haven't studied it.
So it's possible that for some people with that disorder,
training in self-hypnosis might help,
but we'd have to see how hypnotizable they were
and take it from there.
I want to return to some of the underlying neural networks
and the clinical applications,
but what sorts of things,
aside from the asthma,
have you used hypnosis successfully for,
or have others used clinical hypnosis for?
And are there any particular areas
of psychiatric challenges or illnesses,
I guess they're called,
that are particularly amenable to hypnotic treatment?
Yes, there are.
Hypnosis is very good as a problem-focused treatment.
It's really, it's the oldest Western conception
of a psychotherapy,
and it can be used for specific problems
in a way that's very helpful.
We found it very helpful for stress reduction,
for helping people deal,
we're all dealing with stress these days.
And it's helpful,
that mind-body connection is very helpful
because part of the problem with stress
is your perception,
you mentioned it earlier in a sort of good sense,
you're at a football game or something
and you feel the physical reaction.
That can be a reinforcing thing.
Wow, this is exciting, let's do it.
It can also be very distracting.
So you're worried about getting COVID
or you're worried about some other physical problem you have
and you notice it in your body.
Your body tenses up, you start to sweat,
the sympathetic nervous system goes,
your heart rate goes up.
And when you notice that,
you think, oh God, this is really bad.
And then you feel worse.
So it's like a snowball rolling downhill
and then you feel worse and then your body gets worse.
Hypnosis can be very helpful
in dissociating somatic reaction from psychological reaction
so we teach people to imagine their body floating
somewhere safe and comfortable like a bath, a lake,
a hot tub or floating in space.
And then picture the problem that's stressing them
on an imaginary screen with the rule
that no matter what you see on the screen,
you keep your body comfortable.
So at this point, you still can't control the stress
but you can control your physical reaction to it.
And that starts you feeling more in control.
At least there's one thing I can manage.
And then you can use it to think through
or visualize through one thing you might do
about that stressor.
So hypnosis is very helpful in controlling mind-body
interaction in relation to stress.
It's very helpful for people to get to sleep.
We're having a lot of fun with that.
I'm getting emails from people who said,
I haven't slept right in 15 years
and now for the first time, I'm listening to your app
and I can sleep at night.
So it's very helpful.
And again, if you wake up in the middle of the night,
I tell people, don't look at the clock.
That's an arousal cue.
You'll just wake up more.
But picture whatever you're thinking about
or worrying about on that imaginary screen
while your body's floating.
So watch your own movie, but keep your body floating.
And many people can use that to get back to sleep.
I've been using the self-hypnosis for sleep
for a long time.
And now the Reverie app, and we'll talk about
our relationship to the Reverie app and its uses.
I find it incredibly useful for falling back asleep
in the middle of the night.
And it raises a question I've found,
and I think I understand this correctly,
that one can do self-hypnosis during the daytime.
And then if there's an issue that comes up later,
like so for instance, do self-hypnosis for stress reduction
away from the stressful event to prepare one
to deal with stress better.
Or do a hypnosis for improving the return to sleep.
And that can be done when you actually want to go to sleep,
but it's kind of a training up of these networks, right?
That's right.
So is there evidence that these brain networks
actually form stronger connections
when people do self-hypnosis over time?
Well, there's a rule in neurobiology, as you know,
that neurons that fire together wire together.
Our friend, Carla Schatz.
Yes, Carla.
Not Donald Hebb, by the way.
I keep trying to, there's a widespread myth in the world
that is unfortunately all over the internet,
which is that the word fire together, wire together
was said by the psychologist Donald Hebb.
Donald had many important things,
but it is the neurobiologist, Carla Schatz.
That's exactly right.
Yes, is at Stanford, but was also at Berkeley and Harvard.
So also decent schools.
But is at Stanford who said fire together, wire together.
And so she deserves the credit for that statement.
Yeah, so with repeated use of self-hypnosis,
one could imagine that these networks are getting stronger.
I would think so.
We don't have evidence of that yet,
but long-term potentiation provides a pathway,
and you've described them on your program a number of times,
that allow for repeated activation of a network
to actually build new connections that work.
And at the least,
even from a learning and memory point of view,
our memory is all a network of associations.
That's how we remember things.
And the example I'd like to give
is you go back to your grade school,
and you see these little tiny lockers,
and the size is all wrong,
and you suddenly have a flood of memories
that were obviously stored there,
but you just didn't think of.
So context and association is what memory is about.
If you start to acquire memories about a problem,
so one thing we use hypnosis for
is treating phobias, for example.
And the problem with people who have phobias,
like airplane phobias, or crossing a bridge,
or being up high, is that the more they avoid it,
the more the only source of associations and memories
is their fear.
They don't have any good experiences with it
because they avoid it.
It's like get back on the horse
after you fall off kind of thing.
And with hypnosis, if you can start people able
to manage their anxiety enough
that they can have more, a wider array of experiences,
they start to have a network of associations
that isn't so negative and may even be positive.
So it's almost like a, sorry to interrupt,
but I have to ask, it's almost like a exposure therapy
done in the mind.
I mean, it's always in the mind.
I mean, even exposure to, if I have a snake phobia,
which I don't, I don't like snakes,
but I don't think it qualifies as a full-blown phobia.
I think I have a healthy fear of snakes.
But if, let's say I had a snake phobia,
the typical approach would be cognitive behavioral
approaches, right?
Would be to show a picture of a snake
or then a rubber snake, then a real snake.
Eventually the person is holding a boa constrictor
or something like that.
That's all in the mind because it's all translated
into nervous system signals.
But with hypnosis, sounds like you can give
a number of positive experiences
without having to use any props,
without having to bring any animals into the room
to drive someone across the bridge.
Is that right?
Yes.
I had a woman who was a very successful businesswoman,
high level in a corporation.
I had a terrible dog phobia.
And so I had her imagine that somebody brought in
a dog to the room and I said, what are you doing?
And you could see her getting tense.
And she said, well, I'm waiting to see what the dog does.
And I said, if somebody who works for you
comes into your office, would you freeze
and wait to see what they did?
And she said, of course not.
And I tell them what to do, you know.
And I said, well, so you're immobilizing yourself.
The power isn't with the dog, it's with you.
So imagine what you might do to engage the dog
and help control the situation.
And she said, thanks.
And this reminds me of one of my favorite stories
about hypnosis that my father was seeing a woman
who lived in Midtown Manhattan
and had a horrible dog phobia.
She'd drop things, she'd spill coffee, she saw a dog.
She would time her trips to the store
when she thought it was least likely
that people would be walking dogs.
Now that wouldn't be possible.
Everyone, it's like a fleet of French bulldogs
taking over New York City.
So he taught her to think of a dog as a friend,
have a neighbor who had a dog, bring the dog over,
but hold the dog by the collar and make sure.
And gradually she was able to stroke the dog
and say, dog friend, and distinguish
between wild and tame animals.
There are animals, you should be afraid of this.
So she seemed to be doing better.
He called back about three months later
and asked for her and said, well, who's calling?
The son said, and he said, Dr. Spiegel.
And the boy said, that's weird.
And my father said, what's weird?
He said, Spiegel's in heat.
She had bought a dog and named it Spiegel.
Talk about transference.
I love it.
But it really speaks to the power of this.
And it brings me back to this issue.
So what is different about what your father did
in that case with this woman,
in terms of what happened in hypnosis
that allowed her to go from being completely terrified
of dogs to owning a dog and naming it after your father,
which I find amusing.
But that's different than just the two of them
sitting down and talking about it, right?
In therapy, the narrative is a huge component
and in hypnosis, narrative is a huge component.
So it must be that the brain state
is what is really different,
because we'll talk about trauma in a few minutes,
but I think people who have trauma or phobias
certainly could have a conversation about it.
Some of them might freeze up.
Some of them might lose their articulation and so forth.
But what is different about that state
that combines with narrative you think
to allow these underlying neural networks
to engage her to change?
Because I find this so fascinating
because every attempt at dealing with stress or phobia
in the clinical setting involves some discussion
about what it is.
But here we're not talking about any medication
being introduced,
at least not in these particular circumstances.
So I just, I realized it's kind of an obvious question
like it has to be some difference in brain activity,
but I find that to be incredible.
The control variable there is the brain state.
It's not what's spoken.
You're raising a couple of very important issues, Andrew.
We talked earlier about systematic desensitization
where you sort of lay out a hierarchy of things
and do it one at a time.
I think of this as unsystematic desensitization
because you're changing mental states.
And I think there's more and more evidence
that mental state change itself has therapeutic potential.
We're seeing that with ketamine,
treating depression as a sociogenic drug.
We see it, we know it every morning
when we wake up that problem.
You made the mistake of reading a nasty email at 11 p.m.
You didn't know what to do.
You wake up in the morning and think,
oh, that idiot, yeah, here's what I'm gonna do.
So just changing mental state itself
has therapeutic potential.
And I think we underestimate our ability
to regulate and change responses,
to be cognitively, emotionally, and somatically flexible.
And so we do things, you're right,
that follow similar principles of facing a problem,
seeing it from a different point of view.
And you've done a really nice podcast on trauma and stress
and how you have to expose yourself to it, not avoid it,
as we talked about before,
and then find some way to reconnect to it,
to substitute something that can make you feel good
rather than bad so that you activate other centers
of the brain, like mesolimbic reward system.
And so I do that with hypnosis,
and you can do it much faster.
People don't think they can, but they can.
If you're having, right now, that physical experience,
I'm thinking about this,
but I'm not feeling as bad as I used to,
that can be a powerful thing,
and you can do it with hypnosis.
So I had a woman came to see me
who had suffered an attempted rape.
It was getting dark.
She was coming back from the grocery store,
and this guy grabs her
and wants to get her up into her apartment.
It's outside her apartment.
And she starts fighting with him,
and she winds up with a basilar skull fracture.
He runs away.
The cops come.
Since she hadn't been raped, they left.
They weren't interested.
And she wanted to use hypnosis
to get a better image of what this guy looked like,
which is a painful, upsetting thing.
So she was quite hypnotizable.
I got her floating.
I say, you're safe and comfortable now.
Nothing can happen that will harm your body.
But on the left side of the screen,
I want you to picture this guy
and his approaching and what's happening.
And she said, the light, it was getting dark.
I really can't see much of his facial features,
but I do recognize something
I hadn't allowed myself to remember.
If he gets me upstairs, he doesn't just wanna rape me.
He's gonna kill me.
And so in some ways,
what she was seeing was even worse.
So you're thinking good Spiegel.
You made her even more frightened than she was before.
But as you had pointed out in your PTSD stress lecture,
you've got to confront the trauma
to restructure your understanding of it.
So on the other side of the screen, I had her picture.
What are you doing to protect yourself?
And everybody in a trauma situation
engages in some strategy of self-protection.
That's the Salience Network kicking in.
And she said, you know what?
He's surprised and I'm fighting that hard.
He didn't think I would.
And so she realized on the one hand
that it was even worse than she thought it was.
But on the other hand,
that she actually probably saved her life.
And so it was a way of helping her restructure
her experience of the trauma and make it more tolerable.
So that helped with her.
She didn't recognize, she couldn't identify the guy,
but it helped her restructure and understand her experience.
And that's something that you can do
in just talking straight out psychotherapy,
but sometimes you can do a hell of a lot faster
and more efficiently using hypnosis.
And there is one randomized trial out of Israel
that shows that adding hypnosis to PTSD treatment
actually improves outcome.
So it's a way of accomplishing things that we understand
in the broader psychotherapy world,
but much more quickly and sometimes effectively.
Yeah, it sounds like going into,
somewhat into the state that one is trying to deal with,
but then dissociating from that state is key.
And I could imagine,
and I've been open about this on various podcasts.
I've done a lot of analysis over the years.
So, but I've experienced myself that in those sessions,
depending on how I show up to them,
I might just get in kind of a laundry list of what happened
as opposed to actually feeling anything
around what happened.
And I think people probably varied
in the extent to which they can drop into feeling states
and it can depend on the day.
It can depend on how well you slept the night before
and so on.
There's one thing I might add, Andrew,
and that is, you know, there's a notion
of the late Gordon Bauer.
We just had a memorial for Gordon at Stanford.
He died about a year ago.
Brilliant cognitive psychologist.
So one of the founders of cognitive psychology at Stanford
and a great pitcher.
He almost became a major league pitcher,
but he decided to go to grad school instead.
And I'm glad he did.
But Gordon helped establish the concept
of state-dependent memory,
that when you're in a certain mental state,
you enhance your ability to remember things about it.
And the sort of the bad example of that
is the drunk who hides the bottle
and can't remember where he put it
until he gets drunk again.
That he's in that same mental state.
People go into dissociative states when they're traumatized.
So in a way, hypnosis is helping them remember
and deal with the memories better
because they're more in the mental state
that is more like what happened.
And most rape victims will tell you,
I was floating above my body feeling sorry
for the woman being assaulted below.
People in traumatic episodes, they just say,
you know, I blank out.
I don't know what's happening.
I'm on autopilot.
And that's a kind of self-hypnotic state.
So when you use hypnosis to help them deal
with the traumatic memory,
you're making the state they're in right there
in your office with you more congruent
to the state they were likely in when the trauma happened.
And I think that is part of what helps facilitate treatment
of trauma-related disorders.
I see.
So that makes me have to ask every question I have to ask
because I really feel it as almost a compulsion.
Then if dissociation during a traumatic episode
is part of the adaptive strategy,
but it creates certain issues.
It creates problems, right?
Why would something like ketamine,
which creates a dissociative state,
be useful for the treatment of trauma?
This is what I'm confused about these days
because our colleague, Carl Deisseroth,
who's also been on this podcast
and his coworkers have figured out,
okay, there's these layer one networks in the neocortex,
and those are involved in dissociative state.
And so we're starting to gain some understanding
of how ketamine works at a neural level.
It does seem as if for certain populations,
it can be a useful treatment.
I don't know, I've never tried it.
I don't know what the current status of that is,
but it is legal.
It is allowed, at least it's FDA approved and it's in use.
Why would dissociative states be useful
if some element of dissociation is what gave rise
to the trauma memory in the first place?
Well, yeah, Carl had a brilliant paper in Nature
where it was from rats to humans in one paper.
And he showed that there's this rhythmic discharge
in the retrosplenial region that is associated,
that is triggered by ketamine.
And the rats actually showed dissociative-like behavior
in that they would touch a hot pad
that they ordinarily wouldn't,
and they didn't seem to have much pain in their paw.
And he then had a male subject
who had implanted electrodes.
Human.
A human subject, yeah, human subject.
And the electrodes had picked up this rhythmic activity,
and when they did, he would report
being in a dissociative state.
And his description was,
it's like being a pilot of an airplane,
and then I felt myself walking out of the cockpit,
and the plane was still flying.
That sounds terrifying to me.
That sounds terrifying.
I want to be in my body most of the time.
That's right, but the point is,
in a way, the principle, Andrew,
is like the principle you said,
that you need to re-confront a traumatic situation
before you can modulate your associations to it.
So you have to accept it, accept the arousal,
put some boundaries around it,
and then figure out how you can approach that problem,
or how you did approach that problem
from a different point of view.
So it does not surprise,
in fact, we've studied people who dissociated
during the Loma Prieta earthquake
and the Oakland-Berkeley firestorm.
I remember both of those well.
Earthquakes follow me.
And then I move south, and then the northridge.
I'm going to keep it right here.
So there'll be one layer this afternoon.
I'm starting to dissociate, Andrew.
So dissociation does compartmentalize experience,
but that means, from the point of view of treating trauma,
it's an inhibition.
You don't engage it.
It's like it happened over there.
And I think what happens is that people
are sometimes too good at being able to separate themselves
from the recollection, so it's in there somewhere.
It's out of sight, but it's not out of mind.
It's having effects on you, but you can't deal with it.
You can't reprocess it.
So I do think one reason ketamine might work
is that, in fact, it allows you to keep,
to re-approach the dissociative experience
in a way that you can then start to think about
and do something about it.
And just the fact you can turn it on and off.
And that's also where self-hypnosis is so helpful.
It's not something that just comes over you
and happens to you, it's something you can make happen.
You can control it.
You can do something with it.
So you feel less helpless and out of control.
The essence of trauma is helplessness.
It's not fear, it's not pain, it's helplessness.
You become an object.
You become just your body.
You don't control what's going on,
and we're not used to that.
You and I have discussed this brilliant paper
on anticipation of breathing,
and it's not whether you breathe,
inhale or exhale or hold your breath.
It's that if you think you can inhale and you can't,
that is really upsetting, understandably.
And so the issue is control.
And hypnosis, which has this terrible reputation
of taking away control, is actually a superb way
of enhancing your control over mind and body.
I love that.
And it reminds me that naming is so important.
You almost wonder if self-hypnosis and clinical hypnosis
had been called something else,
that it would have been separated out from stage hypnosis
in a way that would make it less scary, weird,
complicated for people to embrace.
But part of the reason for having this discussion
is I've had great experiences with hypnosis.
I've seen the data.
We're talking about a lot of clinical examples.
It's incredibly powerful,
and it boils right down to neural brain states.
And I think in the years to come,
it's going to become more widespread.
Along those lines, how quickly,
you've described some examples
of people getting relief very quickly.
How permanent are those changes?
Is there a need for follow-up?
And related to that,
I'm sure a number of people are listening to this
and thinking, wonderful, I'd love to get hypnotized
for any number of different things by Dr. Spiegel
or somebody else expert in clinical hypnosis,
but they might not have access to you or somebody
with similar training.
So what is the power?
So how quickly does it work?
How long lasting are those changes?
And then is it necessary to work with a clinical hypnotist?
And is it better to do that than self-hypnosis
and so on and so forth?
Maybe you could just give us a contour of the landscape
of directed and self-directed treatment.
Well, typically most people start
by coming to see a clinician like me.
It's better to see someone who has licensing and training
in their professional discipline,
medicine, psychology, dentistry, whatever.
Because there are a lot of hypnotists out there
who are just hypnotists.
Just hypnotists.
Okay.
And the key issue is somebody who can really assess
what your problem is and make sure
that you're not talking someone
into reducing their chest pain
rather than getting their coronary artery problem.
Because they could have a real issue there.
They could, right.
Hypnosis might adjust but wouldn't deal
with the deeper underlying issue.
That's right.
On the other hand, and typically when I use it with people,
I often only see them once or twice or periodically
but not every week.
And certainly not every day if they have a pain problem.
And hypnosis is very helpful for pain.
And so what I'm doing is identifying
how hypnotizable they are.
I give them a standard brief test
of their ability to experience hypnosis.
And then going through a self-hypnosis exercise
with them to deal with the problem.
Seeing how they respond to it.
And then teaching them how to do it for themselves.
And in the old days I used to have them
use their iPhone and record that part of the session
so they could play back the hypnosis experience.
Now we've developed an app, Reverie,
that can teach people and step them through
dealing with pain, stress, focus, insomnia,
and help people eat better and stop smoking.
And we have elements that take about 15 minutes
and elements that just take one or two minutes
that people can refresh and reinforce.
So the idea- Two minute hypnosis.
Yes, yes.
And it's one to two minutes now.
And we're finding that two thirds of the people
find that even just the one minute refresher
helps them feel better.
They're reporting they feel better.
So the nice thing is you know right away
whether it's likely to help you or not.
And we've found, we've done studies looking at hypnosis
for pain relief in acute medical procedures.
We did a randomized trial that we published in The Lancet.
Three conditions, people getting arterial cut downs
to chemoembolized tumors in the liver
or visualized renal artery stenosis.
You don't use general anesthesia for this.
It's very uncomfortable and people are anxious.
And we had three conditions.
One was standard care, they could push a button
and get opioids, IV.
Is during the surgery.
During the surgery.
The second is they could do that
plus they had a friendly nurse comforting them.
So we controlled for pleasant attention and support.
And the third was we taught them self hypnosis
for pain control.
So you're feeling, you can change the temperature.
Your body is cool, tingling and numb.
You're floating in ice water and feeling comfortable.
Or go somewhere else.
Leave your body here and go to a desert island
and enjoy yourself.
And we found that it's about two and a half hour procedure
that by an hour and a half, the hypnosis group
had reduced their pain by 80%
compared to the standard care group
using half the amount of opioids.
They had fewer complications
and the procedure took 17 minutes less time on average
to get done because not only was the patient more relaxed,
so was the treatment staff.
They weren't dealing with someone
who was struggling and uncomfortable.
We measured their anxiety.
And same thing, the hypnosis group,
I was worried they were all dead.
They had no anxiety after an hour and a half.
They were saying I'm fine, you know.
And they were fine.
And the standard care group had five out of 10
anxiety scores at that point.
So we published that in The Lancet.
Big randomized trial.
If we had a drug that did that,
every hospital in the country would be using it now.
But there's no industry to push it.
So that's part of what helped us decide
that we needed to help people do this with Reverie
and teach them how to do it
and provide interactive support for them to do it.
And the question, although, is does it work long term?
Because what we can do acutely
doesn't necessarily carry on.
So we did a randomized trial of women
with metastatic breast cancer.
They had advancing disease.
We met with them in a support group once a week
and taught them self-hypnosis for stress and anxiety
and pain control at the end.
And by the end of a year,
the treatment group had half the pain the control group did
on the same and very low amounts of medication.
So it lasts.
And they would say when I felt that pain in my chest
and thought it was a metastasis, I just did the exercise.
I got myself in a warm bath and I felt fine.
So it works because it becomes a skill that people acquire.
But they can tell right away
whether it's likely to help them working with a clinician
or now using the app or other ways of helping them learn
to use it as a skill.
So the nice thing is you will know very quickly
whether it's likely to help you or not.
And if it is, you can learn to do it for yourself.
That's great.
And we will, again, there'll be a link to Reverie
in the caption that's available for Apple and Android.
And I think even though there's a nominal cost there,
I think that, as you mentioned, medications
and other approaches to dealing with these problems
are quite expensive and have all the potential
for side effects and things.
Not that some of those aren't also useful.
Could I, before you get to that, just one thing.
We've worked very hard on the app.
We have an iOS app for Apple.
We decided to table for a moment redoing the Android app.
So it's not, it was available when we were working
through the Alexa platform.
It's not at the moment, but it will be soon.
So I just don't want people to be disappointed
if they're looking for it for Android.
It's on our agenda, but we don't have it at the moment.
Great, thanks for that clarification.
So hopefully in time for both.
I get asked a lot about obsessive thoughts
or intrusive thoughts.
I also get asked a lot about OCD.
Is there any evidence that hypnosis or self-hypnosis
can be used for dealing with obsessive thoughts?
Sometimes.
There are some very obsessional people
who just turn out not to be that hypnotizable,
and it's not random.
They tend to be so over-controlling of thought.
They're all busy evaluating rather than experiencing.
So in some ways-
I know a few people like that.
I mean, me too.
Sounds like a, it sounds like an adaptive mindset
for a lot of professions in areas,
and that we get trained up in that during school,
how to obsess over the exam,
obsess over our social interactions.
I mean, it's part of becoming a functional human being,
and yet you can take us down a different-
We sometimes overdo it.
I mean, I'll tell you one example from extreme situations,
because you're judging, evaluating,
you're not letting yourself experience,
including emotionally.
I know somebody who listens to the tapes from airplanes
that they go down, so they get the black box
and they listen to it, and he said to me, you know-
That's his profession, or he does this recreationally?
No, it's his profession, that's what he did,
because they're trying to do accident prevention
and how to handle things.
And he said that you worry about people panicking, right?
And here, these guys know that they've got 30 seconds,
or some 45 seconds,
and they're just going through their checklist.
He said they don't panic enough.
They're taught that this is what you do,
and there is reason, there's good reason for it,
but sometimes they overdo it.
And it's painful to listen to this,
because you know what's going to happen.
So it's kind of a balance we have to hit,
and sometimes we get too emotional and too absorbed,
and you're not with it enough
to sort of see other possibilities.
That can be a problem.
But on the other hand, sometimes you're too rigid
and controlled, and you don't let your emotions guide you
to what you need to do to protect yourself
or protect others.
So I would say in general that people with OCD
are on the less hypnotizable side of the spectrum.
They're less likely to allow themselves
to engage in anything.
And the typical example is the checking with OCD,
for example.
They don't remember whether they locked the door
or turned off the gas in the oven,
and they keep going back, and they keep checking.
So there, the evaluative component of the brain
kind of overrides the experiential one.
And sometimes people can get some benefit,
but they're not a group that I would select
for being the most likely to respond
to self-hypnotic approaches.
Are superstitions similar?
Superstitions, I think that's more.
There are people who are very hypnotizable
who keep getting caught up in things like superstitions.
And there, the imagination supplants the reality.
And we've seen a lot of that happening recently.
And so I think there it's possible
that they could be helped by learning to sort of see it,
but put it in context,
see it from a different point of view.
I developed a pretty vicious superstition
when I was in college, and it was hard to break, actually.
I always feel that when I talk to clinicians,
I have to reveal certain things about my own pathology.
You'll get my bill later.
Yes, it's part of the reason I arranged this,
I'm just kidding.
But yeah, I did.
I had a habit of knocking on wood for things,
and I noticed it started to,
I would sneak knocking on wood every once in a while,
because I didn't want people to think I was doing too often.
And then I started to realize
that it was becoming a little bit of a reflex.
And then I saw this incredible video
from Ben Solevsky's lab at Harvard.
He studies motor patterns.
He has these rats that press different sequences
of levers and turn dials in order to get a pellet of food.
But that as they do that,
they'll start to introduce these behaviors
that have nothing to do with the actual lever pressing.
They'll start scratching their hindquarters
and things like that, and their head,
excuse me, they don't wear hats, and flipping their ears.
And this is just like a pitcher before throwing a baseball.
We do this, we start to incorporate motor behaviors
that are unrelated to the outcome,
but our mind somehow starts to think
that they're necessary for the outcome.
And so then you incorporate it.
So I decided to break it by simply forcing myself
to not do it for about a week.
And then it just seemed like a ridiculous thing to do.
Knock on wood.
We call it response prevention, and it works.
Because what you do is you set up a new context
in your brain where you get the outcome you want
devoid of the extraneous behavior.
And I knew it was nuts, right?
I knew it was illogical,
but somehow these things take on meaning.
So we talked about stress reduction,
the utility of hypnosis for stress reduction,
phobias, pain, possibly, we don't know,
but for things like ADHD and OCD,
it just will depend on hypnotizability.
You talked about this beautiful study
on the metastatic breast cancer outcome or patients.
Hypnotizability is clearly a key variable.
So could you please tell us what hypnotizability is,
how it's evaluated, and what the Spiegel eye roll test is?
Okay, sure.
So hypnotizability is just a capacity
to have hypnotic experiences.
And we have a test called the hypnotic induction profile,
where we give a highly structured hypnotic experience.
And you know, the old tradition in clinical hypnosis
was that you try a bunch of different things,
walking upstairs and downstairs and other images,
and time what you say to the breathing of the subject
and all that.
And the more you change what you do as a clinician,
the less you can make a variation in outcome.
And it could take a long time, you know,
20 minutes, 30 minutes.
And I just view that as a kind of complex,
not very effective way of assessing
the person's hypnotic capacity.
We know that the peak period of hypnotizability
in the human life is the latency years in childhood.
So every eight-year-old is in a trance all the time.
You know, you call them in for dinner,
they don't hear you, they're doing their thing.
And that's why childhood is such a wonderful experience.
Work and play are all the same thing, you know.
And we try to make them into little adults,
which I think is a terrible mistake.
They, everything is fun for them.
They enjoy learning, they enjoy everything.
So what age are they in this?
This is like six to 10, six to 11.
They're playful, they enjoy everything.
Everything is sort of a game and fun.
And we try to make it miserable for them,
but they've got it.
And then when what Piaget called, you know,
a more adult cognitive framework,
where we learn abstract concepts,
we learn that even if one bottle looks bigger than the other
they can have equal volume.
And so we start imposing logic.
We're growing our DLPFC at that point,
and imposing cognitive structure on experience.
Some people start to lose that hypnotic ability.
By the time you're in your early 20s,
your hypnotized ability becomes extremely fixed.
And there was a study done at Stanford,
Ernest Hilgard, Phil Zimbardo did this,
looking at, they tracked down students who were in Psych 1,
had their hypnotized ability measured,
and retested them blindly 25 years later.
And the test-retest correlation was,
you want to guess what it was?
I'm guessing it's, I don't know, 0.6 something.
Yeah, very close.
It was 0.7, IQ would be 0.6 on a 25 year interval.
So it's more stable than IQ over a 25 year interval.
So once you're at that point, that's where you are.
What are the factors that lead to that?
Well, and so what it means is that about a third of adults
are just not hypnotizable.
Two thirds are, about 15% are extremely hypnotizable.
And we can measure that and give it a number
from zero to 10.
And that's very useful.
For some of my patients when I do it,
I say, look, I'm sorry, you're not hypnotizable,
we're gonna do something else.
Medication, systematic desensitization,
mindfulness, other things.
Or if they're very hypnotizable, I just go for it.
I don't do a lot of explaining.
People who are low to moderate hypnotizable
like explanations about what you're doing,
but then they can still get the benefits.
So it helps me guide the nature of my treatment
with these people.
Now, the eye roll is,
my father used to use an eye fixation induction.
He used to say, look up at the ceiling
and now close your eyes while you're looking up.
You're very, yes, you're very hypnotizable.
So he noticed, he had two patients back to back.
And one was a woman who I'd seen him work with
who had hysterical seizures.
She would just suddenly start shaking.
Real epileptic seizures.
No, pseudo epileptics.
I see, so hysteria.
Hysteria.
And although some people have both,
that is for some people,
real epilepsy becomes a framework
that gets elaborated on for when you're stressed,
you have seizures.
She just had pseudo epilepsy, no EEG abnormalities.
And she, it was really something to watch.
Her husband had to move his workbench near the door
so that if she started to have a seizure,
he could run home and try and help her with it.
It was that bad.
And he noticed that when she did what you did,
when she looked up, when she would have
one of her seizure events, all you see is sclera.
You don't see iris anymore.
And she would start to see.
So he did a great thing with her.
He taught her to have seizures.
Everybody else was telling her to stop.
He made her have one.
So he hypnotized her.
Let's go back to the last time you had one.
And sure enough, she'd start to shake.
And gradually, he'd make them smaller and smaller.
So she was learning.
She could control.
She'd have access.
It's like with PTSD.
You confront, you don't avoid it.
You don't suppress it.
You confront it and figure out how to deal with it.
The next patient he had
was a rigid, obsessional businessman
who wanted to stop being so controlling and all this.
Remind me, there was a New Yorker cartoon of a driver
who comes to a yield sign and he yells, never.
It's always being controlled.
Sounds about right.
You're a New Yorker.
I'm a New Yorker, right.
And so this guy, when he tried to look up,
he couldn't keep his eyes up while he closed them.
And so my father started testing people.
And it seemed that there is a rough correlation
between the capacity to keep your eyes up
while you close them and measured hypnotizability.
So that people who are listening
and watching on video.
So the Spigot eye roll test involves looking up
at the ceiling.
So it's tilting the head back.
I'm tilting my chin back and looking up at the ceiling now.
But I'm also directing my eyes upward and my eyes are open.
And then the eye roll test involves then
closing the eyelids while the eyes are open.
And whether or not the eyes roll back.
And as you said, then you see sclera, the white part.
You see sclera, the white part.
That means you're very hypnotizable
or moderately hypnotizable.
Whereas if the eyes move down and you see iris,
the colored part of the eye, as the eyes close,
less hypnotizable.
And you can look this up online there.
You just put Spigot eye roll test and you'll find it.
And we are also gonna do an actual example
of hypnosis on video later.
Right, so you're asking the brain to do something difficult
to keep the eyes up while closing the eyelids.
And so that's contradictory signals for the third,
fourth, and sixth cranial nerve nuclei
that control eye movement.
You said the third?
Fourth and sixth cranial nerve nuclei.
And so you're suspending one activity while asking them
to do another, and eye movements have a lot to do
with levels of consciousness.
The periaqueductal gray surrounds
these cranial nerve nuclei.
And when we close our eyes when we sleep,
we have rapid eye movement when we dream.
Most drugs that affect level of consciousness
can affect eyes and eye movements,
either the dilation or contraction of the pupils,
depending on whether it's a stimulant or an opioid.
Stimulants make the pupils big.
Right.
Yeah, like cocaine, amphetamine.
Right, exactly.
Things of that sort.
And opioids, you get constricted pupils.
This is what parents, you know,
the parents looking at their kids
coming in the door late at night,
they're looking for substance abuse.
That's right.
So there's something about the eyes
that has a lot to do with level of consciousness.
I mean, obviously, you close your eyes when you go to sleep,
you have rapid eye movement when you're dreaming.
So it's not surprising.
And there's an old Zen practice
called looking at the third eye.
And I think part of the reason that this happens
is where you're looking up inside.
It's like there's a third eye
between the other two in your forehead.
And I think it's because we're visual creatures.
You know, we're pretty pathetic
from a physical point of view.
You know, many animals can outrun us, you know,
or outsmell us or see, you know,
eagles could read the newsprint at 100 yards
and we can't, you know, it's.
So our major defensive sensory input is vision.
And that's why, you know, animals, predator animals
have eyes in the front of their head
so that they have very good detailed vision of prey,
whereas prey animals like deer
have eyes on the side of their head.
So they don't see things that well,
but they have a much bigger range
of potential to see threat.
And we mainly use, and in fact, it's interesting,
there have been social anthropologists that say,
why do we gather where we do, you know, on coastlines
and, you know, at the edge of a forest or something?
It's because you've got protection in the back.
Something can't attack you from one side
and you have a big vision of what might threaten you.
And we tend to like be attracted
to those kinds of physical situations.
So.
And we love vistas.
We love vistas.
Vistas are very calming.
They take us into that panoramic vision.
That's right.
I didn't know this, but it turns out
that most of the scenic spots at any location
in national parks were where people naturally aggregated.
It wasn't, which makes sense, you know,
but that those signs and locations
were built up around people's tendency
and animals' tendencies to aggregate there.
Yeah, there's an interesting book
on the history of the national parks
that says that they didn't give a research study
to support it, but there was no Google maps, obviously.
That's very interesting.
Yeah, panorama and visual boundaries
are really interesting.
I think, so the eyes, as we both know,
are two pieces of the central nervous system
of the brain outside the,
I used to say that the eyes are outside the skull
and a neuro-ophthalmologist wrote to me
and vehemently pointed out
that they are outside the cranial vault.
So, you know, they're outside the cranial vault,
but they are two pieces of brain.
They're out there.
And so you mentioned cranial nerves, three, four, and six.
This isn't a neuroanatomy course,
but maybe we could go a little deeper there.
So there's, you said there's contradictory activity.
Looking up is controlled by the one set of cranial nerves
and then the closing of the eyelids
is controlled by another cranial nerve.
No, it's the same one.
I think it's six that when you close your eyes,
you activate, no, it's the facial,
I guess it's the facial nerve.
It's seven, seven, yeah.
But you're looking up,
you're activating the muscles
that force your eyes to look up
and closing your eyelids normally relaxes those,
relaxes that upper movement
because your eyes are closed and you don't need to do it.
So you're breaking a usual customary pattern.
It's like the rubbing, hey, I can't even do it.
See, it's like the,
rubbing your tummy and patting your head.
There's a bit of a conflict there.
But clinically it's been a good probe for you
and for your father.
So was it Spiegel Senior or Spiegel Junior?
That's Spiegel Senior.
That developed the Spiegel Eye Roll Test.
But the key issue is this,
that normally when we close our eyes also,
we're going to sleep.
You're not worried about what's going on
in the world anymore.
Here, you're maintaining resting alertness.
So you're focusing, but you're turning inward.
That's an unusual state.
Normally we close our eyes periodically.
We have to, but when you close your eyes
for some period of time, it's normally to go to sleep.
And you're not worried about detecting risk or threat.
So it's an interesting state
because you're turning inward basically.
You're looking up, you're shutting your eyes
and you're allowing whatever happens outside you to happen
and focusing on what's going on inward.
So I think it's a signal to your brain to turn inward.
Very interesting.
And meditation of course could be done with eyes open,
but almost always is done with eyes closed.
Yes, that's right.
Very interesting.
So you can very quickly determine
whether or not someone is highly hypnotizable,
not at all hypnotized.
When you say about two thirds of people can be hypnotized,
obviously a third cannot,
but within the two thirds that can, there's a range.
And you said 15% of people fall
into this highly hypnotizable category
that I seem to be a member of.
And does repeated use of self-hypnosis
or clinical hypnosis increase or change hypnotizability
for those that can access it in the first place?
I would say in general, it may increase a little bit,
but not a hell of a lot.
And it's not worth the effort
to increase your hypnotizability at that point.
It's worth trying to deal with the problem
you're dealing with.
So you can get better at using it
at the level that you have.
There was a study done in which they tried to train people
to be more hypnotizable.
And obviously there are subjective
and behavioral components to the test.
You can learn to do a little better on them.
But what we found was when we reanalyzed this data,
that we could account for three times the final score
based on the initial hypnotizability measurement
rather than whether or not
they had been trained to do better.
So you can improve it a little,
but it's not worth the trouble.
Got it.
Along the lines of eyes and eye movements,
a lot of interest out there about EMDR,
eye movement desensitization reprocessing.
Shapiro herself was working,
she wasn't at Stanford directly,
but was the local to Stanford, I think in Palo Alto.
So what are your thoughts on EMDR?
Where is it useful?
Where do you think it's less useful?
Are there things that EMDR could be combined with
to make it more useful?
The listeners of this podcast come to,
I think come to the podcast with a range of backgrounds
and interests.
To me, it makes sense why EMDR lateralized eye movements
might work given the newer data
that it can suppress amygdala activity in some animals
and animal models and in humans as well.
But it really hasn't been explored much neurally.
I've heard things like it coordinates
the two sides of the brain,
which to me is just a throwaway.
I don't think there's any evidence
that coordinating the two sides of the brain
is better than not coordinating.
I wouldn't be speaking right now
if the two sides of my brain were well correlated
because language is lateralized.
So I've heard that it mimics rapid eye movements
during sleep, but actually it doesn't.
So, but I have heard people talk about
their positive experiences with EMDR.
What are your thoughts about EMDR?
Yeah, you had a good comment on that
in one of your recent podcasts.
And I'll tell you, one way I sort of think about it
from a bemused point of view is the old,
you mentioned it earlier, the oldest sort of idea
of a hypnotic induction was a dangling watch, right?
You know, a watch.
And in fact, there was enough concern about it
that when automobiles were invented,
there was a movement to prevent installing windshield wipers
because people were afraid that they would be hypnotized
if they watched the windshield wipers
go back and forth on a car.
Now it turns out fortunately that you tend not
to look at the windshield wipers.
You keep looking through the windshield.
And so we have windshield wipers today.
But that movement is what exactly
used to be a hypnotic induction.
I think there is a lot of hypnosis in EMDR.
And I think it's a combination of that
with exposure-based treatments
where you use EMDR to think about it.
You tend not to process the experience as much
and just do the physical part of it,
which I personally think is a drawback.
And every study I've seen that was a dismantling study,
there's no question that people who go through EMDR,
many of them get better with trauma-related problems.
And the VA has a big program using it and so on.
But every program that has dismantled
going through the treatment
with having the lateral eye movement
has shown that the lateral eye movement
doesn't add anything to it.
And toward the end of her career,
Francine was doing now contralateral touching or something.
It wasn't eye movements anymore.
It was other things.
So I tend to think that EMDR
is another form of exposure-based therapy for trauma.
But as you've implied,
with the exception of this possible new data,
it certainly doesn't have to do
with rapid eye movement, sleep.
And I don't think moving the eyes is the issue.
I think it's a way of sitting down and confronting trauma.
And I would rather that the trauma itself
be processed a bit more than often happens
in EMDR.
So a lot of people have gotten therapy.
Some of them have been helped.
Francine used to originally claim
that just one session would desensitize people and do it.
And that's clearly not true.
I see a lot of people who said,
yeah, it helped for a while, but I need more.
So I think it became a kind of overly simplistic approach
to understanding brain physiology, and that part is wrong.
And the interesting thing,
you mentioned suppressing amygdala activity.
It's very interesting.
My late friend, Alan Hobson,
who was a brilliant sleep researcher,
you know Alan, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, I don't know him,
but I read his book when I was in college
about the chemistry of sleep
and the similarities between dream states and hallucinations.
And it's one of the reasons I got into this business.
Yes, well, I worked with him
in a MacArthur MindBody Network for many years.
And he's a brilliant guy,
points out that we need to get into primarily
a parasympathetic state to go to sleep,
that we have to shut off the sympathetic nervous system.
And that's why a loud noise wakes you up
when your heart rate goes up and all this.
So he was brilliant at documenting
what happens in the brain of sleep.
He pointed out something also very interesting about dreams,
which is that the stories in dreams
and even the images in dreams
can change all over the place in crazy ways,
but usually the affect is constant.
So usually if it's a frustration dream,
whatever happens, you wind up frustrated.
And if it's a enjoyment dream,
you enjoy whatever's going on.
So there's a odd consistency and affect in dreams
that you don't have in other states.
And the idea of lateral eye movements
suppressing amygdala activity would kind of fit with that,
that you don't allow intrusions of fear and anger
and upset in dreams.
It may be there all the time,
but it may not be there when you think it should be.
So why is it that you can be falling off a building
and somehow not that scared?
You're just having this experience of flying in a dream.
So I think there may be something going on
about regulating affect,
but we have elaborate and better ways to regulate affect.
Great, so EMDR might incorporate some elements of hypnosis.
So the lateral eye movements,
perhaps by way of suppressing the amygdala,
this fear associated center might bring people
into a more parasympathetic calm state.
So it might be pseudo hypnosis and then exposure therapy
through the discussion about the issue.
Right. Okay.
More research needed on EMDR out there.
And obviously something that's come up a lot
in this discussion and in our discussions
that I have the great fortune of talking to you every week
is, and working together,
is this idea of getting close to the phobia,
getting close to the trauma,
re-experiencing it as a portal
to then adjusting the response to it
and rewiring something so the troubling thing
or the horrible thing is no longer as horrible to us.
That, but the repeating theme is we can't expect
to get over something without getting really close to it,
maybe even experiencing it somatically.
Nowadays, we hear a lot about triggers and trigger warnings,
and certainly one can understand why those are,
why those exist, but it seems like there's a,
in the general population,
there's this idea that we want to move away
from anything that upsets us.
And yet I think it's fair to say,
even though having gathered the statistics that on the whole
that the human beings are becoming more and more anxious
and more and more stressed, perhaps because of,
but certainly in parallel with the fact
that we're trying to move away
from troubling things, troubling things.
So I've heard you say before that it's,
in terms of therapeutic approaches,
it's not just about the state you get into,
but whether or not you brought yourself there voluntarily.
That's exactly right.
So this element of deliberate self-exposure,
deciding I'm going to confront the trauma,
I'm going to confront the pain,
I'm going to confront the insomnia,
I'm going to confront the, you know, and fill in the blank,
and then readjusting one's emotional response
right up next to that troubling thing.
That seems to be the hallmark of this treatment.
And if I'm thinking about it correctly,
of pretty much all treatments for getting over stuff,
if people don't have access
to a really good clinician like yourself,
how should they carry these thoughts and these ideas?
I mean, I think almost everybody of any reasonable age
has memories or things that upset them,
but we learn to suppress them.
What does one do?
Obviously the Reverie app has approaches
to dealing with some of this inside of the app,
but how does one start to think about
actually dealing with something like this
and avoiding the hazards of just kind of reactivating
a lot of painful experiences?
Because a lot of being a functional human being
is also going to work each day, interacting with people,
and not bringing one's trauma, you know,
and dumping it out on the table,
or being able to just function is so crucial.
So how do you think about this as a clinician?
Well, you know, the image that comes to mind
is the Greek myth of Pandora's box, you know,
that it opened and the Furies got out
and you couldn't put them back in.
And we have this kind of fantasy
that once you get into these memories,
they'll take you over
and you'll never get them back in the box.
And I think that's wrong.
You know, people who use hypnosis say
that there are ways to present things to people
that will be helpful in ways that won't.
And one real mistake is to tell someone,
don't think about purple elephants, you know,
what are you thinking about?
You know, it doesn't work.
So you want to find a way to feel in control of the access
and to define what happened on your own terms.
And so I'm not a big fan of trigger warnings.
I think we're going crazy over, you know,
this could be upsetting, that could be upsetting.
Yeah, there are lots of things that are upsetting.
You know, the average kid has watched 20,000 murders
by the time he's 20 years old
watching television and movies these days.
So, you know, we see terrible things
and it's not a matter of,
are you exposed to something that's upsetting,
but how do you handle it?
What do you make of it?
And are you feeling in control?
It's not like, you know,
what Putin is doing to his rival in Russia, you know,
forcing him to watch propaganda movies 10 hours a day
while he's in prison.
It's a matter of thinking about a problem
in a way that leaves you feeling you understand it better,
you're in more control,
you can turn it off when you want,
you can turn it on when you want.
And so we have to, in life, deal with stressful things.
There are studies,
Karen Parker at Stanford has done some wonderful studies
with primates about stress inoculation,
that if you separate a baby monkey from his mother
for two hours a day and then reunite them,
and then you stress that baby monkey later,
they actually handle stress better.
There's less cortisol arousal in the face of the stress.
Stress inoculation has been called.
So mere exposure to trauma or stress,
it's a part of living anyway.
We can't avoid it even if we'd like to.
And it's not pleasant, it's not great,
but it's sometimes things you need to learn about life.
And if you can find an algorithm for facing it,
putting it into perspective, dealing with it,
you become a stronger person, not a weaker person.
So this idea that college students are such fragile flowers
that if you talk about a sexual assault or something,
you're doing something terrible to them, it's just wrong.
And I think we need to build our ability
to recognize and manage stress.
And you can't do that without doing it.
You can't learn or you can't ride a bicycle
without taking the risk of falling off it.
And so I think that's the way I think
of dealing with stress.
Yeah, I really appreciate you saying that.
You and I were both at a gathering,
let's say where this issue was being discussed
and around an issue of a publicized sexual trauma.
And you made an excellent case for why
this stuff can't be pushed under the rug.
And that actually, in my observation,
led to a lot of healing for the people that,
and the families of people that suffered from this.
I do think people are resilient,
but we don't really teach how to think about feelings.
You know, we're told that we need to feel our feelings,
but then again, we are also told that feelings
don't hold all the information.
And so I think that, as you mentioned,
there's no operating or user's manual
for this nervous system thing.
Brings me to another issue,
which is the mind-body connection,
something that we're very interested in.
And you've done extensive work on.
We all like to think that getting more in touch
with our body would be a great thing.
Learning to intercept, paying attention
to our internal landscape would be a great thing.
But as we often discuss, when we're feeling lousy,
then being really in touch with that lousy feeling
may or may not be a good thing, right?
So how should we think about mind-body?
I can see examples in hypnosis,
from your descriptions of hypnosis,
where you want to unify the mind-body connection,
feel what you're thinking,
think what you're feeling, et cetera.
But I could also point to elements
within the hypnotic process in which you are actively
trying to uncouple those.
So it sounds to me like this whole mind-body thing
is a bit more like a car.
You can't say that 40 miles per hour is the optimal speed.
It kind of depends on the road you're on
and the turn you may or may not be taking.
But how should we think about mind-body
in terms of navigating daily life?
What do you think is the adaptive way
to conceptualize the mind-body?
It's a big question.
It is, it's a very interesting one.
I guess I think that it's a matter
not of absolute control, but more control,
that we need to think of our brain as a tool.
And our body signals as tools as well
to help us understand what's going on in the world,
what we need, what matters, what's important, what isn't.
But also something that can be managed,
not simply absorbed.
And so hypnosis, I think, is a kind of limiting case
where you can push it about as far as we can push it
in terms of regulating pain.
Pain is a good example of that.
Obviously, you need to pay attention.
If you just broke your ankle,
you better pay attention to it and get help,
or you're having crushing substernal chest pain.
You better do something about it.
But our brain is sort of programmed
to treat all pain signals as if they were novel pain signals
if it's a sudden new problem that needs to be attended to.
I teach people to think of the pain and categorize it.
See, does the pain mean that if you put weight on this,
you're gonna re-injure your ankle, for example,
or does it simply mean that your body is healing
and the pain is a sign that gradually
things are getting back to normal?
And so you can modify the way you process pain
based on what your brain tells you the pain means.
And that's true for emotional pain as well.
And particularly where I think a strategy that really helps
is if you think of an interpersonal problem
or a threat of something coming as an opportunity
to do something to ameliorate the situation.
So it's not just it's happening to you,
but something that you can influence and do something about.
So it's blending the receptive with the active response
that I think can make a difference.
So you try and process it in a way
that gives you a deeper understanding of what's happening.
You face it, but you also say,
this is an opportunity for me to do something about it.
And the minute you realistically enhance,
and this doesn't mean imagine a way, a heart attack,
it means figure out how to rehabilitate from a heart attack
or a broken leg or something like that
in a way that you get as much control
into the situation as you can.
I love it.
Grief, grief is one of those states
that is very hard to remove oneself from.
And a lot of people ask me, how do I deal with grief?
And I'm not a clinician, so I'm deferring to you.
On the one hand, actually someone at Stanford recently
came to me and said, my mother passed away
and I had a sibling that passed away
and they were the only people that I had.
And I'm also living alone
and I'm challenged with a number of things.
And they looked like they were holding it together
very well, in fact, given what they were describing.
And on the one hand,
well, I certainly pointed out that I'm not a clinician,
but I said, on the one hand,
you could imagine that it would be necessary and useful
to go into the grief state
if you want to transition through it.
On the other hand, I've heard before
that the cathartic model of just really diving
into an emotion can also be potentially hazardous
if you don't have any anchors to grab onto.
What is the view of psychiatry or your view of grief
and how to deal with grief?
Because I think grief is one of those
all-encompassing emotions for many people.
It is, and it's a very important,
natural, necessary stage of life.
And the reason we have all these grief rituals
from burials and memorials and headstones
and sitting Shiva and other things that people do,
it's a way of making it real,
that an incomprehensible loss has to be comprehended.
You have to realize that you're now gonna have to live life
without your loved one, your parent, your sibling, whoever.
And we've all gone through this at one time or another.
I certainly have.
And it's very hard to just come to terms with,
but one principle is to sort of say,
it's never all or none, it's more or less.
So yes, it's all or none that you've lost a loved one.
But I ask people as part of their grieving
to say to themselves,
and I do this in hypnosis sometimes too,
you've lost them, but what have they left you with?
What have they bequeathed to you even though they're gone?
And I'll sometimes ask them to say,
if your mother could be here right now,
what would she say to you?
How would she feel about your life now?
What would she advise you to do?
So in our support groups for women
with advanced breast cancer, we lost people.
And I gotta tell you that we were warned by oncologists
that we demoralize people that,
I mean, they were wonderful oncologists,
but there were some that were very afraid
that we would harm them in some way
because the mortality rate is fairly high
with metastatic breast cancer.
They're gonna watch people die of the same disease
and you'll demoralize them.
So we actually measured their emotion
and the content of speech every five minutes
throughout a bunch of groups
to make sure that wasn't happening.
What we found was that they talked about more serious issues
but the mood didn't actually get worse.
And we found in general that expressing negative emotion
on the long run helps people be less anxious
and depressed over time.
And we've shown this in randomized clinical trials,
so it's not just my clinical impression.
And what we try to get them to do is to face a loss,
live with the emotion that comes with it,
but also see that the reason it hurts so much
is how much that person gave you.
So we would do a self-hypnosis exercise
at the end of the group and say,
I want you to get your body floating safe and comfortable.
Now picture Mary and sit with the feeling of sadness
that she's no longer with us.
And we do that for a few minutes.
And then we'd say on the other side,
picture one thing she left with you that you still have
that you carry on in your heart
her tradition of what she gave to you.
And so just seeing it not as a complete loss,
but as a real loss, a painful loss,
but one that helps you to reflect on what you gained
from her and knowing her,
I think can be very helpful in the grieving process.
That's very helpful, a way to conceptualize it.
A couple of quick questions.
Can children be safely hypnotized or do self-hypnosis?
It's sometimes harder for them to do self-hypnosis.
They need more structure to do it.
You've gotta share your dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
with them a little bit.
But yes, absolutely, children can be very hypnotizable.
And I know pediatricians who use it wonderfully all the time
they get them to focus on something else.
So they're gonna have to give them a shot
or draw blood or something.
And they'll say, I'm gonna press your happy button
and presses their belly button
and they start to giggle the way kids do.
And meanwhile, the nurses drawing the blood
and they don't even notice it.
Dentists, good dentists can use it
to help kids with fear and pain.
So yes, it can be very effective for children.
We did a randomized trial.
I have a publication in pediatrics.
My late sister who was a pediatrician
and who always used to joke that she was the only one
in our family who was a real doctor.
I said, I got you, I got a paper in pediatrics.
And the paper was children having to undergo
avoiding cystourethrograms.
So the anatomy of the kidney, if you'll forgive me,
is sort of interesting in that the ureter
that goes into the bladder
normally goes into the bladder at an angle.
And so that means that when the bladder contracts
to expel urine, it automatically closes off the ureter
because it's sideways to the bladder.
Some kids are born with it perpendicular
and then you'll get reflux into the kidney.
And some children outgrow it.
Some need pretty complicated surgery to fix that.
And so you image them every year or so
to see whether they're getting kidney damage or not.
And it's a pretty miserable experience.
You're a nine-year-old girl.
You have to go and lie on a hard, cold table,
have strangers pull your legs apart
and stick a catheter into your urethra
and hold in the bladder and then expel urine.
And so you get into these struggling fights.
And of course, the more they struggle,
the more they constrict and it makes it harder to do it.
So I was asked if we could test it.
So we did a randomized trial at Children's Hospital.
They either got training in self-hypnosis.
I would meet with them and the mother the week before.
We find out from the kids where they like to be.
And I'd say, you're gonna play a trick on your doctors.
Your body's there.
You're somewhere else.
Go visit your friend.
Go to Disneyland.
Do something else.
And the mother would work on this with me
at the head of the table.
And we found that these children were much easier to image.
One got so relaxed that, so your guy would,
he said, normally it takes us 10 minutes
to get them to pee after they're doing this.
She was so relaxed, she started peeing
before I could even get the bedpan under her
and I had to clean up the table, you know.
And they also, 17 minutes shorter procedures.
And that's a long 17 minutes for a little kid.
So it can be very effective with children.
They're less anxious.
They have less pain
and get through these difficult procedures very well.
That's great.
Has hypnosis ever been done for couples,
like couples therapy?
I'm thinking of pretty much every clinical setting here.
Both people have to be hypnotizable, of course.
But the reason I ask about this is next,
I'm going to ask about psychedelics.
And there's a lot of interest in coordinating states
through the use of drugs of different kinds.
We actually do this when we treat depression, right?
You have a depressed person with a family members
who are not depressed and you say, well,
let's make them all not depressed, right?
I mean, but in all, and I'm only half kidding there
because that is kind of the underlying logic in some sense,
but are you aware of any coordinated hypnosis?
That's interesting.
I've done plenty of it in groups, not with couples.
You can hypnotize large groups at once?
Yeah, yeah.
Are we hypnotized right now?
Yeah, you are.
I hope you've been enjoying it.
But the metastatic breast cancer,
and there was a group of like 10 women
who would meet once a week
and we would all go into hypnosis together.
I didn't realize that you were hypnotizing them
collectively.
Yes, yes, right.
Fascinating.
And that, you know, if anything,
I think it brings out the best in people's abilities
because it's a shared social experience
and they would talk about it afterwards.
And so, yes, that's absolutely doable, yeah.
And I don't want to focus on psychedelics specifically,
maybe that's a topic for a future episode,
but is there any basis for combining hypnosis
with drug therapies inside of the hypnotic episode?
So I realize that some patients of yours
might be prescribed a antidepressant
or a medication for some purpose,
maybe same or different than the hypnosis
is being directed toward,
but is there any evidence that if people are relaxed
through the use of a Propranolol or some, you know,
one of these many things in the psychiatrist's kit,
that hypnosis can be more effective?
Well, interestingly, one study that I haven't mentioned
is we did spectroscopy on people who were hypnotized
and we found that there was a correlation
between hypnotizability and GABA activity
in the anterior cingulate cortex,
which fits with turning down activity.
So to the extent that we can self-medicate
and GABA receptors basically are doing
what benzodiazepines do to the brain,
that can happen when people are hypnotized.
So you're saying inside of the hypnosis,
you have neural evidence that there's a kind of
a sedative effect of hypnosis at the chemical level?
Yeah, right, right.
The people who are more hypnotizable
have more of those GABA receptors
and it's related to the degree of their hypnotizability.
In terms of, there have been studies
where they try to give people medications as well.
And the interesting thing with benzodiazepines,
which activate inhibitory activity in the brain,
if you're very anxious,
it might improve your hypnotic response a bit
if you're just so anxious and you can't do it.
If you're not very anxious,
it actually inhibits hypnotic activity
because you get sort of sedated and just out of it
and you can't focus your attention as well.
So by and large, we don't use drugs
as an adjuvant to hypnotic experience.
Most of the time you don't need to
and sometimes it can make it worse rather than better.
There's some evidence that mild stimulants
might enhance hypnotic responsiveness a little reliably,
but too much will again scatter attention
and you'll have less control over it.
So they might be adjuvants,
but I frankly think hypnosis is more of a replacement
than a need of supplementation.
Your laboratory, my laboratory have,
well, sort of snuck into your lab
and then trying to kind of merge the two.
It's been a lot of fun and learning a lot
about the power of respiration of breathing
to shift brain states, not just during breathing protocols,
but at all times.
And we will do an entire episode about those protocols,
I think after those are published and so on.
But breathing itself is,
you've described as a bridge between conscious
and unconscious states.
And so I have to ask how important
is the patient's breathing pattern?
How closely are you monitoring their breathing pattern?
How closely do you monitor your own breathing pattern
as you're inducing hypnosis?
Put simply, what is the role of respiration
in shifting the brain's state during a hypnotic protocol?
Yeah, that's very interesting.
You had a great show with Jack Feldman.
Jack Feldman, and he is.
And the issue, I watch it, I try,
the work that we're enjoying doing together
shows that there are breathing patterns
that may increase sympathetic arousal or may decrease.
It may help in cyclic sighing,
seems to actually where you have more time spent
exhaling than inhaling.
And there's reason to believe that it induces
parasympathetic activity,
because you're increasing pressure in the chest.
And therefore, allowing the heart to slow down
because blood is being returned to the atrium more easily.
I do use it, I ask people to take a deep breath
as part of the induction and then slowly exhale.
And partly as a result of our research together,
I'm emphasizing this slow exhale more
as part of, to enhance the idea in the induction
that this is a period of relaxation,
because I think they are inducing that
and perhaps perceiving it as well.
So there's no, you're absolutely right
that breathing is very interesting
because it's right at the edge of conscious,
and Jack talked about that too,
of conscious and unconscious control,
that it will go on automatically, but we can control it.
And so it's a kind of way for us to demonstrate
to ourselves greater ways of modulating our internal state.
So you can either do it thinking about it
the way we do with pain control and hypnosis,
or you can do it to some extent
by taking charge of your breathing
and doing things that will produce a change
that you want to see happen in your body.
So I like it because it's right at that margin
where you can enhance, for me,
I like that as a way of augmenting hypnosis
more than medication.
I think this is a powerful way of doing that.
Great, I'm really excited to see where all of this goes.
Breathing, vision, bodily states, clearly the,
and directed mental focus
seem to be the key elements of hypnosis.
Am I missing any other ingredients?
Yeah, I think that's right.
Breathing, vision.
Breathing, vision, how you change your vision.
And you don't, typically you're in a physically relaxed state
but frankly there are people at the peak of performance
including physical, athletic performance
or musical performance
when they're in hypnotic states too.
I've talked to classical pianists who say,
I'm not thinking, if I start thinking
about what my fingers are doing now, I screw up.
I'm floating above the piano thinking about the tone
that I want to feel exuding from the instrument.
So that's a hypnotic like state too.
And many athletes who are in peak performance
are just flowing with it.
They're not thinking step by step, what am I doing?
And that's when you're doing your best.
Or when we're working or giving a talk and doing it well,
we're in a hypnotic like state.
So it usually requires,
but doesn't necessarily require physical comfort
or quietness.
It can sometimes be intense activity.
Incredible.
Well, this has been an amazing discussion.
I've learned so much as I always do from you.
Where can people learn more
about how they can get hypnotized?
We mentioned Reveri, we will put a link to it.
It's R-E-V-E-R-I.com is the way to access that.
Or it's the Reveri app from the app store is the other way.
Reveri.com is the website, you can get to it through that
or download the Reveri app from the app store.
Great.
So currently on Apple, hopefully soon, also on Android.
But in the meantime,
what if people are interested in exploring clinical hypnosis
working with you or somebody similar?
Is there a centralized resource that people can go to
to find really well-trained hypnotists?
There are two good professional organizations
that will help you with that.
One is the Society for Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis.
And I think that's S-C-E-H dot U-S is their website.
We'll look it up and provide a link.
And the American Society for Clinical Hypnosis.
And they both provide referral services for professionals.
You can look it up.
I would just say in general,
look for someone who is licensed and trained
in their primary professional discipline,
psychiatry, psychology, medicine, dentistry,
and who has training and interest in using hypnosis
is a way to do it.
Great.
And then one more question, and then a comment.
The question is, will you be my psychiatrist?
I'm honored, I'm honored.
It's a tall task.
I might be the most stubborn patient.
I think the hardest work's already been done, Andrew.
Thank you.
You're fine now.
I appreciate that.
Well, and the final thing is a comment.
First of all, thank you so much for being here today,
for sharing your knowledge.
I hope we can do it again and again.
I hope so.
I love working with your laboratory and with you.
Likewise.
Because when you speak, I learn,
and I know others do as well.
We will put resources to get to you.
But I also just want to say thank you
for doing the work that you do.
It's an incredible thing that in this world
where we are discovering so much about how the body works,
the mind is still rather mysterious
and people are struggling with a lot of things.
But also I think people are really excited
about applying tools like hypnosis to perform better,
feel better mentally and physically.
And so you've pointed us to a tremendous amount of resources
and how these tools work
and where they've already been demonstrated to work.
So just thank you.
I know this is your life's professional commitment in life
and we all benefit.
So thank you so much.
Well, thank you.
But it's been a real joy for me
to be collaborating with you
and for you to be using your precision and knowledge
about neuroanatomy, neurobiology to address problems
that often people who are that disciplined
in the primary neurobiological end
aren't as interested in as you are.
And so it's really been a pleasure to try
and bring together what we both know
from these different perspectives
to build something that neither of us could do alone.
And so it's been a real joy for me to do it.
Thank you.
I'm honored.
Thank you very much, David.
You're welcome.
Thank you for joining me today
for my discussion with Dr. David Spiegel.
I hope you found it as fascinating as I did.
And if you'd like to see the video
of Dr. Spiegel hypnotizing me
in what constitutes a abbreviated clinical hypnosis session,
you can go to the Huberman Lab Clips channel on YouTube.
Also, if you'd like to check out the Reverie app
for self-hypnosis designed by Dr. Spiegel and colleagues,
you can go to Reverie, that's R-E-V-E-R-I.com
to see the Reverie app.
There's also other information there
about the scientific studies that support the Reverie app.
If you're enjoying and or learning from this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe to the podcast
on Apple and or Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five-star review.
Please also leave us comments and feedback
as well as suggestions for guests
that you'd like us to host on the Huberman Lab podcast
in the comment section on our YouTube channel.
Please also check out the sponsors
mentioned at the beginning of today's episode.
That's the best way to support this podcast.
We also have a Patreon,
that's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman,
and there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
On many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast,
we discussed supplements.
While supplements aren't necessary for everybody,
many people derive tremendous benefit from them
for things like enhancing sleep and focus
and various other aspects
of brain and body health and performance.
One issue with supplements, however,
is that many of the supplements out there
simply do not contain what's listed on the bottle
and or the quality of the ingredients is not very high.
That's why we partnered with Thorne supplements.
Thorne supplements are used by all the major sports teams
and they partnered with the Mayo Clinic.
The reason they have so many high-level partners
is that Thorne supplements
are of the very highest quality ingredients.
They also are extremely precise
in terms of what's listed on the bottle
is always what's in the bottle.
If you'd like to see the Thorne supplements that I take,
you can go to Thorne, that's thorne.com
slash the letter U slash Huberman,
and there you can see the Thorne supplements that I take
and get 20% off any of those supplements.
Also, if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site
through that portal, thorne.com
slash the letter U slash Huberman,
you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
If you're not already following us on Instagram and Twitter,
please do so.
It's Huberman Lab on both Instagram and Twitter,
and at those channels,
I cover science and science-related tools,
some of which overlap with the content of this podcast,
other of which does not and is unique content.
So once again, thank you for joining me
for my discussion with Dr. David Spiegel,
and last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
I'll see you in the next one.